we're not treated any differently than anyone else.
You're treating us differently.
You're pointing out that we're different, that we're of a different race, of a different, you know, and we really don't like it.
And she said, this was a girl named Jennifer Sims.
She started A&M in 16 and she'd already been to Blint a year.
She finished up with a double major in philosophy and architecture and is now in law school, I think at Vanderbilt.
But she said, I'll tell you what I'll do.
I'll take over the student presidency of the peer advising group, but we'll make it for everybody.
It'll be all new incoming freshmen and all transfer students.
And you can't differentiate as to race, which is what we've done since then.
And that was probably two years before Hopwood.
Why has architecture, and this campus in general, been so nearly totally free of racial incidents?
I think it's because you're an Aggie.
I think that's the answer.
And we've never had a race problem over in architecture because they're in those labs together all the time.
They get to know each other really well and I think they would feel insulted, you know, if anybody tried to be prejudiced over in architecture, they'd tear them to pieces.
And I presume you had plenty of Asian students.
Oh, yeah.
That's no problem either.
They've been some of our very best students.
As the program was growing in quality, did the College of Architecture attempt to recruit incoming students?
Yeah.
Did they all go to high schools and so forth?
I was generally responsible for that.
How did you describe that effort?
It was kind of a lost cause because you would go to the high schools and you would go to the architectural areas.
Well, it turned out the architectural drafting or things like that were the kids that couldn't make it in academics.
So I might spend six periods talking to students and find three students that could even go to college.
And I just had a talk with Keith Sylvester at noon today who's a black PhD student, a faculty member, that wants to take over the summer program.
our career horizons thing, and he was talking about doing the same with the high schools, and I said, you know, you're probably, it's a lost cause, in that the students we're trying to attract now are that are actually going to get admitted to A&M.
You probably aren't going to find any of them.
in any of the architecture classes.
You might find them in the honors class, but how often is it going to be for one single person in a college to be able to go to an honors group at a high school and say, I'm representing a particular college, not the whole university.
So you're probably going to step on admission toes and things like that.
I don't think the diversity thing is going to be, I guess the only thing you can do is if they apply to the university, then you try to write them like heck, you know, if you find out that they are a minority and try to get them that way.
What image did you, have you and others found that A&M's, in general, but A&M's architecture program has in regional, in the high schools in this region?
For some funny reason, Consolidated, I don't know who's teaching them there or guiding them, but they seem to go elsewhere, which is really funny because the other programs are so straight architecture, they have no ability to go in any other direction but just straight architecture.
And they seem to be getting some guidance from the high school.
Not from Bryan, but from Consolidate, which I thought was kind of interesting.
I remember when Susan Sackett was trying to go to, I think it was Michigan or Michigan State, and
A guy at Michigan had known Bill Sackett and had phoned him and said, did you know what your high school counselor wrote about Susan Sackett?
Not Susan Sackett, that's Karen Sackett.
And he said, no, what do you mean?
He said, well, they wrote that, no, she hadn't done any leadership stuff.
She was like president of the student council.
She was chair leader.
She was all this other stuff.
But they said, you know, you really just need to go to A&M.
That's where you need to go.
You know, so a lot of those counselors there wield a lot of power.
And depending on what their thoughts are, I think.
Now when I said region, I was meaning this region of the United States.
Oh, this region of the United States.
What is the image of?
We're known pretty much all over.
Like we've had to cap our enrollment, which you probably know, engineering business and architecture, and we're probably already full for next fall.
Even though applications aren't due until February the 15th, I imagine we have totally reached our quota at this point in time.
And we've had people from San Diego, from Chicago, from all over, especially for the VIS program,
And hopefully in the next two years we'll have a VES curriculum that will be the first undergraduate electronic arts program going, you know, if the dean has his say.
As you and your colleagues think about the programs here in architecture, with what other institutions in this part of the United States do you think are the primary competitors?
It's almost like apples and oranges.
The closest example is like if you were to go in the Galleria and you were to walk through Neiman's and then you walked outside and then you went into an Ann Taylor boutique.
Rice would be like an Ann Taylor's boutique, so would University of Texas, so would Arlington.
Tech's just not quite there yet.
They're trying to be a little more well-rounded, but it's like it's two different stores.
Whereas we have all of the stuff in the Neiman's that Ann Taylor has, but we have so much more.
There's no other school that has
You know, the planning.
And landscape you can barely get at Arlington.
At Tech it's in agriculture.
And it's more of a, if you want to go for wool's nursery.
So nationally?
Nationally I would say Berkeley, North Carolina State, Arizona State, Florida.
Those would be the closest schools.
Would we be in the top 20?
Oh, yeah.
If you would look at what we had to offer, you know, it would be in the top, you know, two or three.
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
If you would look at it as an architecture boutique, which is what 98% of all the schools of architecture are boutiques.
And if they say, is this a pure design school, you know, they would not rate A&M as a pure design school because we're not.
And as far as research, we're always one, two, or three.
And 98% of them have no research.
The closest school in the state of Texas is UT, and they're 23rd in research in the U.S.
All right, now for Rodney Hill, trace your growth, progress, and some big steps in the 80s and 90s.
What were your tasks and your greatest accomplishments?
that I developed in the 80s was more on the creativity line of how to get students more in tune to their creativity.
And then when McCarthy came, I'd never thought of publishing at all.
I mean, I always thought my artwork was publishing, which he allowed.
But he also wanted you to talk about it.
So when he first got here, I had to do a talk at, it was the Beginning Design Conference and it was held in Albuquerque.
And Stasel was there and John Ferry was there and we all had our papers accepted.
So I was going in through some of the stuff that I do in my design class which was completely different from the rest of the nation.
And they were like...
One of my friends at another university said, well, if you're going to say some of these things, you have to have statistics to back it up.
And so I went through the last, I guess it was six years of my freshman class and then started logging them.
And there were like 15 sections and I had three.
It turned out that 90% of all the scholarships were people that had been in my class.
90% of all the people that won outstanding freshman, junior, sophomore or senior had been in my class.
And then all the people that won the high grades or outstanding talent, I think the lowest I ever had was 85%.
And so that was one of the reasons when Windler took over.
Some of the faculty said it's unfair for Rodney to do that with three sections.
You know, you need to develop a course so, and I don't mean to be bragging, but you can ask Walter.
So he established what was called a freshman theory class.
So I get every single freshman in my class.
And I go over creativity, problem solving, future studies, and environmental psychology with them.
And so, and it also seems to kind of, it changes their attitude.
It gears them to be real positive about learning.
Students that come out of the class are really gung-ho to continue on and do the next step.
They're not burned out.
They see, you know, light within themselves.
So that's probably
I would say my biggest claim to fame.
All right, but you were teaching and still teaching all this time, first or second year.
Yeah.
Right.
But then you became… Associate Dean.
Yeah.
When did that happen?
About 88, 89, right in there.
And that was with McCarthy because McCarthy was having so much problem with the students.
And they were, you know, rioting against him and wanting to tear down everything.
And so he was advised to get an associate dean that the students could identify with and trusted to calm them down.
And so that's when he asked me to come in as associate dean.
So you've been doing that since then?
Right.
All right.
Describe a typical work day for you now.
It begins about when and it includes this, this, this, and it ends about what?
Well, it starts about 8 in the morning and ends 6.30 to 7 at night, depending on a faculty sponsor for AIAS and for other groups around campus.
So if they have night meetings, then I have to go to those.
But I'll start in and up till this year.
the undergraduate programs office and all the advisors were in there with me, you know, in various offices.
So my management style, which is almost a no management style, is like I'll do anything that I ask my advisors to do.
If one of them is sick and there's a line of students out the door, I'll sit at her desk and counsel students until the cows come home.
And we always were trying to help students.
If they would come in, they had a problem, we would solve it.
And we're super student friendly.
Students knew they could come down for our help.
They divided it up this year.
More what I've been doing this year is chairing committees, like chairing this curriculum for visual studies and things like that that somebody's got to do.
I don't particularly enjoy doing it, you know, but I mean, I always, he didn't want me, he wanted me to stop teaching to take this job and I said no.
So that's my lifeblood.
So you've been teaching how many courses?
Well, one course, about 160 to 170 people.
Okay.
And all right, back to the workday.
So that about how much of your workday is in that office doing paperwork?
Now, this year, it's the majority of my work is doing paperwork.
And then I do most of my class development stuff at home at night.
You know, read the books I need to read to make up new lectures.
When do you do your creative work?
Usually on weekends.
which has gotten to be a problem.
I'm thinking of just going to teaching and letting somebody else administer for a while.
Other personal accomplishments during those 25-30 years that you haven't mentioned so far.
Well, I enjoyed getting Parents of the Year.
One year, I was first faculty member.
Oh, really?
Yeah, 93 and 94.
How did you learn that you were?
Well, our daughter was supposedly going to get a Shewitz Award.
And so we went that Sunday to see her get the award.
And instead, our names were announced.
So it was a surprise.
Yeah.
How good.
So that was fun.
And then for two years, actually I think it happened the same year, I got the Ed Guthrie Award and then I got the... What's the Guthrie Award?
It's an advising award by the University Council of Advisors.
And then a month later I got the faculty, the former students, Student Relationship Award.
Shewitz was a close friend of ours.
Oh, really?
And I really, really like him.
What is the Shewitz Award?
Spirit Award.
Oh, no.
Are you saying WIRUS?
Oh, maybe it was the WIRUS Award.
I'm sorry.
I thought it was the Shewitz Award.
You're right.
WIRUS, W-E-I-R-U-S.
All right.
And then what year did you?
Let's see, this one was 85 for this, and then 90, I think it's 92, I got the one for student relations.
So you have one for teaching and one for student relations.
Right, and then the Ed Guthrie, then I got the college level one, and then I have the student senate one.
Can I hit the John one quick?
In the mid-70s when school board elections and they had always been controlled by the ag mafia and the local bankers.
And so we were trying to get some gifted and talented programs within the college and the College Station School District and we were being met with all sorts of opposition.
So we ran Joe Natowitz and Bruce Robeck.
Anyhow, it was fairly, you know, terrible name calling, you know, from the other side.
And we were all politically naive.
But we were all trying really, really hard.
I'm thinking of this in light of Florida.
So we knew it was going to be really, really close.
So...
On the day of the election, I went in to the architecture building, and there were a bunch of students there, and a lot of them had their voting thing here, and of course none of them would even think about going to vote for school board.
And I had a case of beer in the back, and I said, hey, how would y'all like a beer on a quick ride to the polls?
And Bruce won by, and that was by nine votes.
And I had taken 12.
So you may have swung.
Yeah, I kept real quiet.
You may have swung.
About that.
But when would that have been?
Mid-70s.
And then two years later I ran and got in then.
And O.D.
Butler was trying to down me in front of the college station PTO.
And he didn't really do any background.
But he said, why would we want anybody from California on our school board?
I said, well, I'm from Lubbock.
Both my parents were born in Texas, my grandparents were born in Texas, and I have Le Pen Apache from Mason County in my blood, and so I'm pretty much Texan as close as you can get.
And then somebody in the back popped up and said, O.D., aren't you from Michigan?
Now, you do know where O.D.
is from?
No.
He went to high school in Orange.
Oh, did he?
Okay.
Yeah.
His brother was the long-time chairman of the Orange School District, in my memory.
Old, old, old Orange status, yeah.
Okay.
In terms of the community, what did you and your family think about the Ann and Consolidated School District quality?
Loved it.
Well, we sent our kids to St.
Thomas, because that's where we were going, you know, for the early school, with Mary Oxley and that group, and, you know, you couldn't have asked for anything better.
And then they allowed us, which I thought was really nice, they allowed us to pick our first grade teacher, which we did.
And well, St.
Thomas instilled in the learning, love of learning.
And then as long as we had one good teacher each year, it was fine.
Did you and your wife find that your children, when they got to college, that A&M and Salt Lake had prepared them well?
Both of them graduated fifth in their class, which is funny, you know, two years apart.
But Bunker had placed out of all of the engineering math and started in a sophomore engineering math when he got here.
And Brooke, when she was doing her master's at Thunderbird, most of them said, how did you go to a public school in Texas?
and still able to, you know, function.
You know, because they had just the whole idea of Texas in general as being a wasteland for public education.
But Bunker did great in, you know, all of his graduate classes.
He carried the golf line for College of Science when he graduated.
What other, have we not mentioned already, what other special moments for you?
Oh, you might want to – you know Steve Ryder, of course.
Steve who?
Ryder.
Oh, of course.
Yeah.
One of his favorite stories was Benson in the early 70s.
Dean Benson met with all the faculty of engineering and told them that nobody in his faculty could have facial hair.
And Steve, who had never had a beard, you know, because it always grew funny with him, decided he'd better grow a beard at that point in time.
And then, let's see, when, what's his name, was running for governor against white, started with a B, Briscoe.
Oh, Briscoe.
Steve was head of the, what, Center for Mineral and Energy Resources or something.
Anyhow, that was available to either governor or either candidate, and so White had come in and gotten a whole bunch of information, and evidently during one of the debates, White just laid Briscoe flat using literature from the center.
So when Briscoe got elected, it was like Steve could either resign or A&M could lose its funding for the center.
So, that was kind of funny.
But then, Alpha Stan Spellhouse, when he was here, his centennial, you remember him.
A thing that happens with creative people is creativity is a self-involvement.
It's not something you do out in public.
And so, you know, the guy is obviously creative, you know, three inner patents and all sorts of things.
So, but he was housed over in science and engineering, which are some of the more anal retentive areas of the campus.
So, anyhow, we decided...
we would have a party for him.
And so about six right of us got together and we sent out invitations, and the only one you could get in was to bring an original work of art, poem, music, sculpture, and that was your entrance.
So he brought in Spillhouse, a 30-second wire with a ball that rolled down, and he turned it upside down.
It was really neat.
When we started chatting with him, the things that you can find out when he, you know, he trusts people, we found out about his, what his creative process, the way he works is like, he does a three hours when he's in a zone state or flow state, then he does three hours above.
And depending on how many ideas he's got going, he said he's been able to maintain this for up to two weeks.
And so what would happen, he gets enough rest in this that he doesn't need sleep.
And then he eats and puts things down in this area.
But it was kind of interesting too that you couldn't have pulled this out of him had you walked up to him in an engineering class and said da-da-da-da.
But then after he was here, Farley, that was the computer science head, or Farley, he called over.
He said, I have all these PhD students.
They can do anything I tell them to do, but they can't create anything on their own.
And so, you know, can you have a 685 class and can you name about four faculty members that would team teach it?
I'm trying to think.
Sweeney was in on it.
I was in on it.
There was an English prof that taught rhetoric that was in on it, and Skip Porter.
So we started trying.
And for, I guess, three weeks, you know, two class periods a week, we were met with hostility.
You know, people with their arms crossed, you know, 20 students in there glaring at us, listening to all this mushy, you know, butterfly stuff.
So we decided to have as a surprise lecture, but we wouldn't tell him who he was.
It was Jack Kelby, who just won the Nobel Prize and invented the integrated circuit handheld calculator.
And so, anyhow, Jack, you know, was about 6'5", 6'6", looks like he dressed at the Bryan Mission.
And he comes slumbering in to the classroom, and they're all going, oh God, now what?
So he starts talking about creativity and da-da-da-da-da-da, and they're all going, oh God.
So Skip saw this and thought, they really should be paying attention.
So about 15 minutes until he said, stop just a minute.
Okay, why don't you all tell me what field this person's from?
So somebody was guessing philosophy, and somebody was guessing this and the other, and he said, do you have any idea?
you know, and so they told him who he was, you know, and their jaws just dropped to the desk, you know, and they like, you know, and started taking notes.
And then from that point on, the course was a complete turnaround because they finally realized that their God, you know, deals in that same way.
And let's see.
Oh, and Skip Porter, the next year,
decided with his senior engineering class, it was one of their capstone classes, he thought he would try it with them.
And so he walked in the first day of class and he passed him out sheets of paper with things that were possibilities to be invented.
He said, what if we don't follow the textbook?
and you pick out inventions that you want to work on, and we'll spend the whole semester trying to come up with solutions to these problems, and then we'll set you up with patents, with all these things."
And there was just this sort of stunned silence across the classroom.
And finally one brave person said, can we get back to you, Dr. Porter, next class period, and we'll talk amongst the class.
You know, he said, sure.
So the next class period, they got up, and the one person got up and said, the syllabus says you will give us three quizzes weighted equally, dot, dot, dot, and we will study, dot, dot, dot, dot, and the textbook will be so.
This is the class we stand up for, and this is the class we expect to take.
Which is interesting.
And then let's say on things that happened in the 70s, Wayne Stark and the arts committees.
Well, he started all the arts committees and so he immediately put me on as chair of the arts committee.
The first time, see, we were showing, we had booked in a film series that had been shown at SMU and TCU.
And the first film that was shown here, Stark heard about, I think it was Pink Flamingos or something.
And so anyhow, he went in and banned the committee, you know, dissolved it, thinking, well, we'll get a new student group in.
So I was in charge of it again.
And then we brought in Edmund Carpenter, who is Dominic de Menil's son-in-law, who's a famous anthropologist that wrote, let's see what did he write, What a Blow That Phantom Gave Me, and there's another thing he wrote, I'll find out in a minute.
He came in and did a fabulous lecture on anthropology and art, you know, nothing radical about it, but he was saying, you know, Andy Warhol's a personal friend of my wife and I, and this place is like a cookie cutter out of the 50s, and said he would love to come in.
and tape some things and record.
He'd do a free talk if you'd let him just tape stuff.
So anyhow, we went back and told Wayne Stark about this.
Well, two weeks later that arts committee was dissolved.
And then,
they decided that they'd better start hiring staff advisors that they could control.
So they hired Carolyn Adair and she took over the Arts Committee and they said that, you know, that would be the controlling one.
And then Jack Williams, when I was digging around
Finding the plaster cast under the old museum, you knew about that story.
When they tore the museum down, all of the friezes from all over the campus were almost all destroyed.
So anyhow we pulled out the ram's head and pulled out the horse that's on the Old Vet School which is the CE Building and I had the centerpiece and a 55-gallon drum that someday I'll mosaic together.
And so anyhow I brought him by to see him and that's when I was carving on the panels and he said, well you found them.
Just consider them years, you know, do with them what you want.
And so when he and his successors, Miller and who's the other one?
Vandiver?
Well, besides Vandiver, there was an agriculture one.
Oh, you're not talking about Bill Mobley?
No, no, before Mobley.
The one that got in all the trouble with the secretary?
Oh, oh, oh, oh, that's the Chancellor, Hanson.
Hanson, okay.
Well both of those people tried to get them away and they found out about them, you know, and I think Hanson had a secretary phone and said, if you would go ahead and frame them up nicely, you know, in velvet and stuff like that, he would take them as a gift, which I always thought was fun.
And let's see.
Oh, and the only negative thing I had when I first was working on the panels was I'd gone over to the Corps Center and the Corps was really helpful, you know, in supplying me with all sorts of stuff.
And so they gave me a braid because, you know, going from a photograph to carve the braid would be impossible.
And I had a handful of medallion medals, too, that I had to carve.
And he stopped me and, you know, just challenged me, what the hell do you think you're doing with those?
And I said, well, I'm going to carve them.
He said, you better take good care of them.
You shouldn't even have them in your possession.
You know, only Corps people have those sort of things.
And he said, if it were up to me and the rest of the campus, we'd build a 25-foot wall around the architecture building and not let any of you all get out.
So that was Hermit and Brown.
So we went through that one.
Oh, the Italy thing.
The Italy program started back in the 70s with Dan McGillivray.
How did that come about?
Well, we didn't have a study abroad program.
And so he had made some contacts in France and started the program up there.
We were there two or three years.
And then he made contacts in Italy with Paolo Baricieri to set up there.
And then they went for, up till 1988, they went with the Italy program.
And A&M poured in tens of thousands of dollars through student fees and everything else.
And the place was dilapidated.
It was an old monastery that they had fixed up really nicely.
Were you ever there at the Pocherina?
No, I've never been there.
Well, they had patched the thing up, but they needed some more permanent repairs.
And so anyhow, the bishop in Florence had sent out his real estate guy.
They hadn't even bothered with it in eight years to look at it.
And the real estate guy said, hey, you've got a little gold mine there.
That building's in really good shape.
You're not charging them near as much as you should be charging them.
So he was going to like quintriple the rent.
So they sent Sally Shepherd over during the summer.
And I was there that summer.
So Sally came over with her husband and
So we all went into Florence, and she was to go meet with the bishop.
So we were waiting for her for lunch, and we could see her two blocks away.
Some people you can see radiate.
Well, she was stomping.
She was so mad.
And she got there, and we all sat down to lunch, and she said, first of all, they said they couldn't believe
that a major university would send a woman to do business and that they didn't believe that I was a provost.
I had to show them documentation that showed I was a provost.
And then they went on and on and on.
And she said, well, A&M is the one that took that from a rundown.
She had the first photographs to where...